---
title: Just another free soul
subtitle: An Interview with Joi Ito
author: Joi Ito
description: >
  This interview was conducted by Christopher Adams and Chiang
  Huei-Hsien in Tokyo on 5 February 2008.
portrait: https://www.flickr.com/photos/joi/477842380/
image: https://c1.staticflickr.com/1/200/477842380_ee69046f6f.jpg
credit: Photo CC-by Mizuka
bio: >
  Joichi Ito (伊藤穰一), more commonly known as Joi Ito, is an
  American-educated Japanese activist, entrepreneur and venture
  capitalist. Ito is the CEO of Creative Commons. He is on the board of
  Technorati, Digital Garage, WITNESS and Global Voices. He is the
  founder and CEO of the venture capital firm Neoteny Co., Ltd. Ito’s
  photographs have been used in The New York Times Online, BusinessWeek,
  American Heritage and BBC News. He is the author, with Ryu Murakami,
  of the book Dialog – Ryu Murakami × Joichi Ito.
source: From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
links:
    - name: website
      url: http://joi.ito.com
    - name: photoblog
      url: https://flickr.com/photos/joi/
chinese: /yeeyan/foreword-by-lawrence-lessig.html
---

IN HIS FOREWORD TO THE BOOK, LESSIG WRITES THAT YOU UNDERSTAND YOUR
SUBJECTS "BY LEARNING TO SEE THEM IN A CERTAIN WAY." WHAT IS THAT
CERTAIN WAY?

I think I'm trying to get a mental image of a person, certain
expressions, or what I think that person is about. I'm trying to capture
what I think they look like, which is many times a minority of their
typical expressions, or their typical stance. So, if I'm taking pictures
of Larry \[Lessig\], I want to have his signature hand gestures, and not
just random ones.

I think I'm trying to capture pictures of people that help others see
what they're about. Some photographers will make someone look the way
the photographer wants them to look, and not the way they appear, so
they'll pick the one picture out of 100 where the guy looks more
egotistical than he really is. Some photographers are almost medical,
and are going after a perfect portrait. I'm somewhere in between.

It's amazing how many people will upload snapshots of people where the
pictures don't look like them at all. To me, uploading a picture that is
not an easily recognizable picture of that person defeats the point,
which I'm working toward, to try to express who they are. On the other
hand, professional photographers usually have a subject whom they don't
know personally, so they end up having to try to capture an image that
they've created based on who they think the person is or how they want
that person to appear. You know how sculptors often say that they're
just freeing an image from a block? What I'm trying to do is free
someone's soul from his or her image. There are a lot of things that
make this hard. A lot of people are uncomfortable in front of a camera,
or might make expressions that aren't very natural for them. And if the
person is nervous, it's very difficult to try to see what it is that
you're trying to capture.

A lot of what I'm doing is, I just start shooting photos. After half an
hour of having their picture taken, people start to ignore you. Or I'll
take pictures when I'm talking to people about what they're doing, so
after a while they get distracted by the conversation and forget about
the camera. That's something that I'm not perfect at, but I'm getting
better.

I think good photographers are also able to disarm people through
conversation, but still, it's difficult to have a disarming conversation
with somebody you don't know, or to make them laugh. Many times people
make a face for me that they wouldn't make for a professional
photographer.

For instance, a board meeting picture, like the one with Eric Saltzman:
that was during a very tense discussion. I've found that people are at
their most animated at these kinds of meetings, and look the most alive
when they are under a lot of pressure, and super- focused. But usually
if an outsider is in the room, they won't get into that. I mean, it
would be difficult for a cameraman to be in a room where a board is
having a heated debate.

But those are the things that I'm trying to capture, because most people
don't get to see that. At the Creative Commons board meeting, Larry
asked me to put the camera away after awhile \[laughs\] because it was
distracting. We were having a very heated discussion and I was taking
all of these pictures. But he credited me later because afterward those
pictures turned out the best.

IN YOUR MIND, WHAT IS A 'FREESOUL' ?

A freesoul is somewhat of a pun. On the one hand it means you are free,
liberated. You, as a human spirit, are open. And then, it also has the
meaning that you are unencumbered legally, that you are free, as in
'free software.'

There's a paradox: with many people's [Wikipedia](http://wikipedia.org/)
articles to which I've contributed, when it comes to the picture, many
of these people don't have any free photos of themselves on the web, so
while they are "notable" on Wikipedia, their images aren't free of the
copyright of the photographer, or the institution who hired the
photographer to take the picture. Often, even the subject of the article
can't make an image available to the Wikimedia/Wikipedia community.

This means that a lot of people who have a Net presence have a legally
encumbered Net presence. People who are invited to conferences get asked
all the time, "By the way, do you have a photo that we can use?" But
they don't. By making these pictures available under a Creative Commons
license, now they do. This is solving the issue of legal freedom.

The third part of the pun is that, since I'm asking for a model release
from the subjects, I'm asking everyone to be much more open and giving
about their image than most people typically are. I'm giving, you're
giving, we're all giving to participate and to try to create this
wonderful work, and allow others to create derivative works.

Of course people can abuse that, just like they can abuse anything. But
I want people to see the value in sharing over the fear in sharing. The
fact is, it's much more likely that somebody is going to use these
pictures for something positive, rather than for something negative. The
benefits greatly outweigh the risks. I think we spend way too much of
our lives worrying about the risks, at the cost of a lot of the
benefits.

This is a celebration of all of the people who are willing to give. In a
way, giving up your image and allowing anyone to use it: it's the
ultimate gift. In one way it's kind of vain. \[laughs\] But in another
way it's wonderful. A Wikipedia article on some person but with no
picture is sad.

BESIDES WIKIPEDIA, HOW DO YOU IMAGINE THESE PHOTOS BEING USED?

They can be used in textbooks and in mainstream media articles about the
person. Now they can get a picture that represents the person, at least
from my perspective. That said, I shouldn't be the only person doing
this. More people should do the same, and make the photographs available
freely. For one, I feel that "free" CC licensed photos have a much
higher chance of not disappearing. But I don't know exactly how these
photos are going to be used, so in a sense I'm curious. For example,
recently I received the Harvard Berkman Center pamphlet. It was a report
of what they're doing, and they also had a bunch of my pictures in
there. They all had attribution, and it made me feel really good. There
were pictures of different Berkman Center members that I had taken in
various places all over the world. I think that the subject is probably
happy with this, and I'm happy, and the Berkman Center's happy because
they're not all pictures of people sitting at desks in the Berkman
Center. There's one more important thing: Creative Commons is great for
original creative works or derivative creative works, but when it
involves human images, it gets very complicated. We all know the Virgin
Mobile case, where Virgin used CC licensed images in an advertisement
without getting permission from the models, and got in trouble. <a
name="1"></a><a href="#footnote-1" class="fn-it"><sup>[1]</sup></a><a
name="2"></a><a href="#footnote-2" class="fn-it"><sup>[2]</sup></a> What
we're trying to do here is to expand beyond just copyright, to make it
more thorough from a legal perspective. It's also an important
educational point, so people understand that, in addition to the
Creative Commons licenses, we need people to provide other rights in
cases where the law requires such rights to be cleared before reuse.

WHAT HAVE YOU LEARNED ABOUT THE PEOPLE IN THESE NETWORKS, JUST IN THE
PAST YEAR?

That's a good question. I think that at least Creative Commons has
become much more mainstream. Creative Commons has moved from a fringy
academic discussion to a boardroom discussion. Yahoo announced that it
will be using Creative Commons for all of their basic infrastructure,
and integrating it all. Google has CC search in their advanced search.

Microsoft is working with CC as well and have a plug-in. Nine Inch Nails
released their album, Ghost, under a Creative Commons license. The list
goes on. Many people are asking: can you make money and share? The
answer is, yes. CC is becoming an important part of the business
discussion.

But one thing that happens when a movement like CC becomes a business
thing, is that a lot of the pioneers fade into the background, and it
becomes a part of industry. This happened to the Internet. And so while
you still have the core people who still remember and hold the torch for
the philosophical side, the Internet has become much more of a business.
Now, when you go to many Internet conferences, it's mostly salesmen in
attendance.

I believe that the success of the Internet has two parts. The first part
is the market- driven business side, which has made the Internet
affordable and ubiquitous. The second part is the strong movement of
participants who fight to keep the Internet open and try to prevent the
business side from corrupting the fundamental elements that make the
Internet great. The Net Neutrality or Open Network discussion going on
right now is a good example of the importance of continuing to balance
these principles with business interests.

Similarly, I think that business interests can help make Creative
Commons ubiquitous and more easily accessible to everyone. However, I
think it's important to remember to keep pushing to make content more
"free" and not allow businesses to use Creative Commons in exploitive or
destructive ways.

In addition to the business side, Creative Commons is being used by
educators to create open courseware around the world and in the area of
science and technology to promote sharing in research. And as of now, we
have the license ported to at least 44 jurisdictions, and the number of
countries with projects continues to grow. In many ways, the movement
outside of the United States has become much bigger than the movement in
the United States. Although the United States is still slightly farther
ahead in terms of commercialization, the size of the whole free culture
movement outside of the United States is huge now. The CC China Photo
exhibit <a name="3"></a><a href="#footnote-3"
class="fn-it"><sup>[3]</sup></a> was just amazing. There were some great
images, and a lot of the photographers were professionals. This is
beyond what anybody has done in the US. A lot of the progress that we're
making is international.

WHAT ARE YOUR PERSONAL REALIZATIONS OR EXPERIENCES?

Well, we're all getting old, if you look at these pictures. But there's
another thing, though, about this book: the number of
professional-quality amateurs has increased significantly due to the
importance of digital in both professional and high-end amateur
photography I hate to say it, a lot of people love the darkroom, but it
really feels like the death of the darkroom with this year.

With new 22 megapixel cameras coming in under \$10,000, and Lightroom
and some of this software at a couple hundred dollars, it doesn't really
make sense, except for particularly fussy artists, to do wet-work
anymore. If you're a commercial photographer or a high-end amateur, you
can do anything you used to do in the darkroom. I think it has really
lowered the bar. I don't know how that affects the industry directly,
but for me, it bridged a huge gap.

I used to be darkroom geek. I loved my darkroom, and even when I didn't
have my darkroom anymore, I still was shooting 6x6 Hasselblad 120 film
and processing it in a special lab, and then digitizing it. For me, that
film was it. You could never get as good as medium-format film or
large-format film

At the time, the digital Hasselblad backs were too expensive, and were
still not as good as 8x10 film. So there was this whole period where the
darkroom was not all that exciting, but the digital wasn't perfect. I
went through a limbo period. I had invested so much in my Hasselblad
system, and my Leica M6 set. I had bought the Leica R8, but I was
kicking myself because it was terrible. But then the Leica M8 came out,
and I bought one at the beginning of 2007. The M8 really got me to where
I could use my old gear, and it had enough megapixels to be as good as
some film.

Another way of saying it was that there was a gear breakthrough at the
beginning of last year. Okay, that's pretty materialistic! So there was
a technology breakthrough, let's call it that, that allowed me to switch
completely away from film, and I think this happened to a lot of
photographers. It caused an explosion of content and an increase in the
quality of content on sites like [Flickr](http://flickr.com). It has
allowed amateurs to create a business model with professionals.
Interestingly, I think these new high-end amateurs are buying more
photography books and photographs and are probably providing an
increasing revenue stream for professional photographers. I think most
amateurs, including myself, are paying homage to the professionals and
not trying to "compete" with them.

DESPITE THE EXISTENCE OF SOCIAL SOFTWARE, WHAT IS STILL IMPORTANT ABOUT
MEETING PEOPLE FACE-TO-FACE?

For me, the right way to use a lot of the new social software is by
making it easier to spend more physical time with the people you like
best. [Dopplr](http://dopplr.com/) is a great example. <a
name="4"></a><a href="#footnote-4" class="fn-it"><sup>[4]</sup></a> When
I visit a city, I will see all of the people who are in the city at the
same time. When I went to London awhile ago, there were 47 people I knew
in London, and a huge percentage of those people don't live there. I
would bet that more than half of the photos in this book are pictures of
friends, and they're not in their hometown.

That's the really interesting thing that is happening right now: it's
really increasing your ability to spend quality time with, actually, a
smaller number of people. It allows you to actively filter. Your
meetings don't have to be random. If I look at the list of people in
this book, although there are some obvious people missing whom I didn't
see last year, probably met more of my friends last year, my real
friends, than I've met in any other year. I know my travels were crazy,
but I think that the online world has allowed me to do that.

What's great about photography is that it captures the moment that I was
sharing with that person. It's not just a connection on a social network
online, which is really pretty binary. I can look at all these photos
and remember exactly what we were doing, what we were eating, what we
were drinking, what we were talking about, and to me that's a much more
rich experience.

It's the combination of social software and photography. For me, reality
is "the present" plus what you remember from the past. I think this
project is really sharing memories with people. Blog posts contribute as
well, but to me photography is a really good way of doing that. When I
look at the expressions, I remember the moment and get a sense of
presence.

I think the main problem for me is the environmental impact of flying
around. Just as I never believed that we would have a paperless office,
being able to connect with people through social software mostly
increases your travel, it doesn't decrease it. It is great because you
get to meet all these people. But it is bad for the environment, and bad
for our jet lag.

HOW WOULD YOU CHARACTERIZE YOUR CONTRIBUTIONS TO FREE CULTURE?

I think it's mostly incremental. I think there is very little we
actually do all by ourselves, and I hate saying, "I did this" or "I did
that." I think that in most cases, focusing on individual contributions
or achievements undervalues the importance of everyone else involved.

Having said that, I think my main contribution is probably in supporting
Creative Commons as a fan, board member, chairman of the board and now
CEO. I think CC has a significant role, and helping to keep it on track
and growing is probably the single most important role that I have in
Free Culture.

Specifically, I think that trying to keep an international focus and a
balance between business and the non-business elements of the movement
is essential. My job is to keep that focus and maintain that balance.
Also, CC needs to run smoothly as an organization and there is a lot of
operational work that we all need to do. My photography is a way for me
to participate in a small measure on the creative side of the Free
Culture movement, and helps me see things from that perspective as well.

However, I believe in emergent democracy and the importance of trying to
celebrate the community more than the heroes. Of course, I'm a huge fan
of Larry's and I have great respect for the leaders of our movement. But
more than anything, I'm thankful for and respectful of all of the
participants who aren't so well known and who are essential to moving
everything forward.

Personally, I don't think it's ultimately meaningful to talk about one
individual's personal contribution to any movement. The real meaning is
in the whole movement. I'm just one participant. Just another free soul.

1.  Linksvayer, Mike. "Lawsuit Against Virgin Mobile and Creative
    Commons - FAQ." Creative Commons. 27 September 2007.
    <http://creativecommons.org/weblog/entry/7680/> [↑](#1)
    <a name="footnote-1"></a>
2.  Smith, Andrew D. "Bedford Mom sues Virgin Mobile over teen's photo
    in ad." The Dallas Morning News. 21 September 2007.[↑](#2)
    <a name="footnote-2"></a>
3.  "首屆知識共享攝影大賽" Nphoto. Creative Commons China. 5
    December 2007. <http://cc.nphoto.net/> [↑](#3)
    <a name="footnote-3"></a>
4.  (Full disclosure: Joi Ito is an investor in Dopplr.) [↑](#4)
    <a name="footnote-4"></a>
